- In the time it takes to distribute and administer
the drug and wait for the chemoprophylaxis to
take effect, the infection has spread.
- The effect of the antibiotic lasts for only a few
days.
- In order to avoid reinfection, the entire popula-
tion of an area under surveillance must be treated
at the same time and then kept isolated.
- People who are presumably infected but have no
symptoms are often reluctant to take the
treatment.
Mass chemoprophylaxis not only has failed to
prevent the spread of cholera but has also diverted
attention and taken up resources that could be used
for more effective measures. In addition, in several
of the countries it has contributed to the develop-
ment of antibiotic resistance, thus depriving criti-
cally ill patients of a valuable form of treatment.
The selective treatment of family members who
have shared food and lodging with a cholera patient
can be useful. As a matter of fact, secondary cases
are not very common in communities affected by
El Tor cholera. In societies where intimate social
relations and the exchange of food among families
are common, it is difficult to determine who is a
close contact. Most people who are infected with
V. cholerae 01 El Tor have only mild cases of the
disease, and as a result they and their close contacts
escape detection and treatment.
When treatment is being given for preventive
reasons, it is necessary to recommend the drug and
corresponding dosage. Doxycycline is the drug of
choice, since only one dose is needed.
Vaccination
The vaccines currently available do not help to
control cholera for the following reasons:
- They are not sufficiently effective;
-
It is often shown that they do not have the
required potency;
- The immunity that they confer lasts for only 3 to
6 months;
- Vaccination does not reduce the rate of
asymptomatic infection.
Even more important, vaccination produces a
false sense of security not only for those who are
vaccinated but also for health authorities, and more
effective measures may fail to be applied.
Moreover, vaccination campaigns divert resources,
care, and personnel from more effective activities.
Vaccination campaigns for controlling cholera
not only waste resources but can also introduce
health hazards that are much more serious. When
inoculation practices are not very safe, as is fre-
quently the case in mass vaccination campaigns,
they have been followed by cases of serum
hepatitis, and in recent years the risk of HIV infec-
tion has become a serious threat to health.
In view of these limitations, the Twentieth-sixth
World Health Assembly abolished the requirement
under the International Health Regulations for a
certificate of vaccination against cholera.
(Source: Health Situation and Trend
Assessment Program, PAHO.)
Clinical Diagnosis and Treatment of Cholera Cases
Cholera is an acute bacterial enteric disease with
sudden onset, profuse painless watery stools,
occasional vomiting, rapid dehydration, acidosis
and circulatory collapse.
Many cases of cholera are mild and cannot be
distinguished clinically from other types of diar-
rhea; they can only be recognized from positive
fecal cultures. These cases are epidemiologically
important because the bacillus continues to circu-
late in the community.
Serious cholera usually has an abrupt onset, with
voluminous stool, but it can also begin slowly, with
mild diarrhea during the first 24-36 hours. Vomit-
ing can be copious; it occurs in most patients and
can be present before or after the onset of diarrhea.
The peak fecal loss usually takes place during the
first 24 hours. The stool have a rice water ap-
pearance, and the volume exceeds 1 liter per hour
in adults and 8 to 10 ml/kg/hour in small children.
After the first 24 hours the rate of elimination
declines. Diarrhea can end spontaneously in 1 to 6
days, and many patients improve without an-
tibiotics if the electrolytes and water lost are ade-
quately replaced. The total volume of feces during
the course of the disease may be as much as 50%
or more of bodyweight.
The metabolic disorders associated with cholera
are caused by the rapid loss of water and
electrolytes. This has clinical importance because
of hypovolemia due to the loss of isotonic fluids,
acidosis due to rapid loss of bicarbonate, and deple-
tion of potassium.
Biochemical studies done before the initiation of
treatment have revealed a high specific density of
14
o

plasma and a drop in arterial pH and serum bicar-
bonate. The plasma concentration of sodium is
normal.
Although there is depletion of potassium, the
serum concentration is usually normal. However,
it can also be low. If the base deficit is corrected, it
is not necessary to replace the deficit in potassium.
Glucose concentration is moderately elevated in
adults, but small children may occasionally
develop serious hypoglycemia. The vomiting and
diarrhea that occur with cholera give an indication
of how much isotonic fluid is lost, ranging over a
period of 4 hours to 1 or 2 days.
The first symptom is thirst, which begins to occur
when water loss reaches 20-30 ml/kg. A loss of
50-80 ml/kg causes weakness, lethargy, and signs
of postural hypotension such as fainting or syncope
with inability to remain standing. If the deficit goes
beyond 80 ml/kg, the thirst becomes more intense
and renal flow diminishes, resulting in oliguria
followed by anuria.
There are muscle cramps and pains in the limbs,
as well as distal cyanosis. The voice weakens, and
some patients develop aphonia. If fluid loss ex-
ceeds 100-120 ml/kg, the disease is usually fatal.
The physical findings in cholera are also related
to the fluid deficit. A deficit of 50 ml/kg causes only
a reduction in skin turgor and moderate
tachycardia. Additional signs of hypovolemia will
develop quickly if the losses exceed 80 ml/kg to
100-120 ml/kg.
* 
If the heart rate reaches 100 beats per minute, the
radial pulse weakens and becomes undetectable. At
the same time, diastolic pressure falls, breathing
becomes more rapid, turgor decreases, the nails
become cyanotic, the skin of the fingers begins to
shrivel and give the appearance of washerwoman 's
hands, the eyes become sunken, and in very young
children the anterior fontanelle is depressed.
The abdomen is soft, the rectus abdominus
muscle can be spastic and give the impression of
abdominal defense, and intestinal sounds are
diminished.
Some adult patients become stuporous, although
usually they are aware. Coma occurs in one-fourth
of the critically dehydrated cases.
Diagnosis is confirmed by culturing vibrio
cholerae of the serogroup 01 from feces. The vibrio
cholerae serogroup 01 includes two biovans
(biotypes) choferae (classical) and El Tor, each of
which includes organisms of Inaba and Ogawa
serotypes. A similar enterotoxia is elaborated by
these organisms so that the clinical pictures are
similar. In any single epidemic, one particular type
tends to be dormant. Presently the El Tor biotype
is predominant. People are the only known
reservoir.
The mode of transmission is primarily through
ingestion of water contaminated with feces or
vomitus of patients, or to a lesser extent, feces of
carriers or ingestion of unrefrigerated food which
has been contaminated by dirty water, feces, soiled
hands, or perhaps flies.
The incubation period is usually 2 to 3 days and
the period of communicability for the duration of
the stool-positive stage, usually only a few days
after recovery.
Susceptibility and resistance are variable; gastric
achlorhydria increases risk of disease and breastfed
infants are protected. Clinical cholera usually is
confined to the lowest socio-economic groups.
Even in severe epidemics, attack rates rarely ex-
ceed 2%. Infection results in a rise in agglutinating,
vitriocidal, and antitoxic antibodies, and increased
resistance to reinfection which lasts longer against
the homologous serotype. In endemic areas, most
persons acquire antibodies by early adulthood.
Treatment
Without treatment, the case-fatality rate due to
serious cholera can reach 50%. With adequate
treatment, mortality goes down to 1%.
Management of the disease focuses on replacing
the fluids and electrolytes lost in feces and
preventing serious dehydration.
Physiological Basisfor Oral Rehydration
Therapy (ORT)
Studies of intestinal absorption of fluid have
clearly shown that during secretory diarrhea in-
duced by enterotoxins some of the mechanisms of
intestinal absorption are inhibited. However, the
mechanism for absorbing glucose and other
mediate carriers for the absorption of sodium
remains intact, even in patients with serious
cholera. Citrate (or bicarbonate) and potassium are
absorbed separately from glucose. Moreover, the
absorption of citrate (or bicarbonate) appears to
increase the absorption of sodium and chlorine.
Numerous clinical studies have shown conclusive-
ly that the loss of fluids and electrolytes in cases of
acute diarrhea and cholera can be adequately
replaced by mouth using glucose-electrolyte solu-
tions when these ingredients are in optimum con-
centration. For the adequate absorption of orally
administered electrolytes, the following conditions
are necessary:
- The concentration of glucose should be 20-30 g
(111-165 mmol/l) in order to achieve maximum
absorption of sodium and water. A higher con-
centration can cause osmotic diarrhea because
the unabsorbed glucose is fermented by the in-
testinal bacteria, resulting in osmotically active
oroducts that attract water to the intestine. A
lower glucose concentration, on the other hand,
can cause insufficient absorption of sodium and
water.
15

- The nearer the concentration of sodium in the
oral solution to the concentration of sodium in
plasma, the faster and higher will be its net
absorption.
- The ratio of sodium concentration to glucose
concentration should be within an approximate
range of 1:1 to 1:1.4.
- Potassium losses due to acute diarrhea are higher
in children under 1 year of age and can be espe-
cially dangerous in undernourished children. A
potassium concentration of 20 mmol/l is well
tolerated and is sufficient to replacing the losses.
-
A citrate concentration of 10 mmol/l, or a bicar-
bonate concentration of 30 mmol/l, is optimum
for correcting the base deficit in cases of
acidosis. Trisodium citrate, dihydrate, is used as
the base instead of sodium bicarbonate, since the
use of citrate salt yields a pharmaceutical product
with a longer shelf life and has a good biological
effect.
Oral Rehydration Therapy
Treatment should be started at once, without
waiting for laboratory confirmation. The patients
should immediately be given large amounts of
liquid by mouth. The formula for oral rehydration
salts (ORS) that has been successfully used for oral
administration and has been recommended by the
World Health Organization (WHO) is as follows
(per liter of water):
Sodium chloride
Trisodium citrate
(dihydrate)
Potassium chloride
Glucose (anhydride)
Sodium
Chlorine
Potassium
Citrate
Glucose
grams/l
3.5
2.9
1.5
20.0
mmol/l
90
80
20
10
111
*Trisodium citrate can be substituted for sodium
bicarbonate 2.5 g/l (which yields 30 mmol/l of
bicarbonate).
Also, ORS packets already prepared for mixing
can be added to 5 or 10 liters of water. These are
prepared in hospital pharmacies where large
amounts are consumed on a daily basis.
In dehydrated children there is a cumulative
deficit of sodium. From studies of fluid and
electrolyte balance carried out in cases of serious
dehydration it has been estimated that this deficit is
approximately 8-12 mmol of sodium/100 ml of
water. Use of the ORS solution with 90 mmol of
sodium/liter of water is adequate for rehydration in
these cases. During the maintenance phase, when
the ORS solution is used to replace steady losses,
the risk of hypernatremia is not a problem because
breast milk or cow's milk, water, or some other
liquid is also being provided at the same time,
depending on the age of the child, especially in
children under 1 year of age. The ORS solution has
been used in this way to treat millions of cases of
diarrhea of various etiologies and in persons of all
ages, and it has been shown to be safe and effective.
When the ORS are given orally, it is not necessary
to calculate the amount of liquid to be administered
because the patient's thirst regulates the quantity
that should be taken.
.
Rapid Endovenous Therapy
Patients with serious dehydration, hypovolemic
shock (unconscious or in coma, weak or impercep-
tible pulse, capillary perfusion longer than 10
seconds), uncontrollable vomiting, fecal output in
excess of intake capacity, inability to drink, or other
serious complications usually require rapid in-
travenous therapy at first in order to achieve
rehydration.
Children who are critically dehydrated and in
shock should receive 30 ml/kg of Ringer's solution
or a polyelectrolyte solution infused intravenously
over a period of 1 hour, followed by 40 ml/kg for
the next 2 hours. If the child has improved after this
3-hour treatment, then the ORS solution should be
offered, and if the child tolerates it, he or she should
be given 40 ml/kg for the next 3 hours and the
intravenous therapy should be suspended.
Older children and adults should receive 110
ml/kg of Ringer's solution or a polyelectrolyte
solution intravenously over a period of 3 to 4 hours,
as rapidly as needed, and then switched to ORS if
they have improved.
If there is no Ringer's solution available, it is
possible to use a polyelectrolyte solution or salt
composed of 3.5 g sodium chloride, 1.5 g potas-
sium chloride, 4,082 g monosodium acetate
(trihydrate), and 20.0 g dextrose. Simple glucose in
water is ineffective and should not be used.
Progress with the rehydration therapy should be
evaluated after 1 hour and then every 1 to 2 hours.
It is important to pay attention to the number and
volume of evacuations, the amount of vomiting, the
presence of any signs of dehydration and any
change in these, and whether or not adequate
amounts of the rehydration solution (intravenous at
first and oral thereafter) have been given.
The administration of ORS is begun as soon as is
possible, especially when normal saline is used
16

intravenously to give the patient bicarbonate and
potassium.
If the signs of dehydration get worse or remain
unchanged, it is may be necessary to speed up
_ 
administration of the solution being used.
The ORS can be administered via nasogastric
tube to a patient who is not in shock but who cannot
drink (due to fatigue, sleepiness, or other reasons)
at a rate of 20 ml/kg per hour if there are personnel
available who have been trained to do this. In
children who are in shock, this procedure should be
used only when it is not possible to give the solution
intravenously.
Antibiotics
Antibiotics are very important in the treatment of
cholera because they reduce the duration of diar-
rhea and the shedding of vibrios within 2 or 3 days.
Oral tetracycline is the antibiotic of choice: 500
mg should be given 4 times/day for 3 days.
Doxycycline (300 mg), a form of long-acting
tetracycline that is given only once, is preferred
when it is available. Other alternatives, when the
strains are resistant, are furazolidone and
trimetroprim-sulfamethoxazole.
No other antidiarrheal, antiemetic, antispas-
modic, cardiotonic, or corticosteroid products
should be used.
Maintenance Therapy
After the initial fluid and electrolyte imbalance
has been corrected and the signs of dehydration
have disappeared, it is important to replace the
abnormal losses due to diarrhea or vomiting and, in
addition, to meet the normal daily requirement for
liquids until the diarrhea ends. During maintenance
therapy the ORS should be used after every evacua-
tion (1/2 to 1 cup depending on the patient's age).
Maintenance therapy also includes continued feed-
ing throughout the course of the disease.
References
American Public Health Association. Control of Com-
municable Diseases in Man. Abram S. Benenson (editor),
Washington, D.C., 15th edition, 1990.
(Source: Diarrheal Disease Control Program, PAHO.)
Laboratory Diagnosis of Cholera
A request for laboratory diagnosis is most impor-
tant upon an initial suspicion of cholera based on
the recognition of the typical clinical features and
the appropriate epidemiologic setting. Because
most bacterial diarrheas are self-limited, stool cul-
tures are generally limited to cases with severe
symptoms requiring hospitalization, persistent or
recurrent and dysentery-like clinical presentation.
The clinical or public health laboratory is usually
organized to process the specimens following an
algorithm designed to identify a list of enteric
pathogens prevalent in the Region. Most
laboratories may not inoculate media suitable for
the isolation of vibrios unless specifically requested
to do so. Vibrio cholerae is not the only organism
to cause watery diarrhea or rice water stools, al-
though it produces the most severe disease. The
approach adopted by a particular laboratory for the
isolation of vibrios will depend on the frequency
anticipated, and the cost-effectiveness of incor-
porating agar thiosulfate-citrate-bile salt-sucrose
(TCBS) medium on a routine basis. Vibrios may be
isolated in other plating media, but a particular
search may need to identify V. cholerae or to screen
for Gram negative bacilli, oxidase-positive
colonies.
Stool specimens should be collected early in the
disease and preferably within the first 24 hours of
illness, and before the patient has received any
antimicrobial agents. Rectal swabs are probably
highly efficient in the acute phase of illness, but less
satisfactory for convalescent patients or transiently
infected asymptomatic persons. Specimens should
be inoculated onto isolation plates with minimun
delay. The viability of vibrio species is well main-
tained in an alkaline pH of rice water stool but is
unpredictable in formed stools. Vibrios are very
susceptible to desiccation; hence, specimens must
not be allowed to dry. When there will be a delay
in plating a culture, the rectal swabs or fecal
material should be placed in the semisolid transport
medium of Cary and Blair, which maintains the
viability of vibrio cultures for up to 4 weeks. Buf-
fered glycerol-saline, often used in enteric
bacteriology, is an unsatisfactory transport medium
even for short periods. In the absence of available
suitable transport media, strips of blotting paper
may be soaked in liquid stool and inserted into
airtight plastic bags to prevent drying, and the or-
ganism will remain viable for up to 5 weeks.
Specimens in transport medium may be shipped to
the laboratory without refrigeration.
17
